Spec lazy-loading room members (#2035)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: specification/client_server_api.rst

which return events. These filters alter the data returned from those APIs.
Not all APIs accept filters.

Lazy-loading room members
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Membership events often take significant resources for clients to track. In an
effort to reduce the number of resources used, clients can enable "lazy-loading"
for room members. By doing this, servers will only ever send membership events
which are relevant to the client.

In terms of filters, this means enabling ``lazy_load_members`` on a ``StateFilter``

> or ``RoomEventFilter``. When enabled, lazy-loading aware endpoints (see below)

Reviewer: Is there supposed to be a list of endpoint that we are pointing to with "see below"? I can't seem to find it, but maybe I am missing something...

Author: yes, there should be...

which return events. These filters alter the data returned from those APIs.
Not all APIs accept filters.

> Lazy-loading room members

Reviewer 2: it's a shame that the general /filter API endpoints now appear under this heading. Suggest moving it to after the API? or giving the endpoints their own `~`-level heading?

Author: Will give them their own heading - that was an accident.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Membership events often take significant resources for clients to track. In an
effort to reduce the number of resources used, clients can enable "lazy-loading"
for room members. By doing this, servers will only ever send membership events
which are relevant to the client.

In terms of filters, this means enabling ``lazy_load_members`` on a ``StateFilter``

> or ``RoomEventFilter``. When enabled, lazy-loading aware endpoints (see below)

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit confused as to what it means to enable ``lazy_load_members`` on a RoomEventFilter rather than a StateFilter :/

Author: Only `/sync` supports it on a StateFilter. Every other lazy-loadable endpoint uses the RoomEventFilter. I guess I should have put those words into the spec...

will only include membership events for the ``sender`` of events being included
in the response. For example, if a client makes a ``/sync`` request with lazy-loading
enabled, the server will only return membership events for the ``sender`` of events
in the timeline, not all members of a room.

> Repeated calls to lazy-loading aware endpoints will result in redundant membership

Reviewer 2: This could really do with an example of wtf qualifies as a "redundant" membership event. I'm really struggling to wrap my head around it.

Author: I'm having troubles trying to clarify this, as it's hard to wrap my head around the algorithm. I suspect this needs someone who knows what they are doing to clarify it.

Reviewer 2: I've had a look at the impl for this, but the confusion is not helped by #5395.

https://docs.google.com/document/d/11yn-mAkYll10RJpN0mkYEVqraTbU3U4eQx9MNrzqX1U/edit#heading=h.q5mz9uiufb2g says of it:

> By default the lazy_load_members setting deduplicates redundant members across the same series of /syncs.  However, if the client does want to receive each and every member on every /sync, it can turn include_redundant_members to true. 

That kinda makes sense: if we've just sent a client a member event for Bob, we don't need to send the same event in the next /sync just because he happened to say something again. 

I guess we can extend that to /messages too: we only need to include member events for senders that we have not recently sent in a sync. But we need to be clear about what counts as 'recently sent': for instance, if we backpaginate to a point where Bob changes avatar (so there is a new membership event), do we then resend his latest membership over /sync next time he says something? (I'm assuming the answer is an emphatic 'no').

Reviewer 2: >  (I'm assuming the answer is an emphatic 'no').

though that is in conflict with https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2035/files#diff-addc31d0732ed525604677b40a2466c2R126 :/

Author: This is one of those points that needs a Matthew to comment on: do we de-duplicate across endpoints? what about for the case you've highlighted (backfill an avatar change)? I don't really have answers :(

Reviewer 3: i'm kinda regretting agreeing to let `include_redundant_members` be a thing. as far as I know, nobody's actually used it, and it just complicates the spec. 

For normal LL (i.e. `include_redundant_members` being false),
 * When backpaginating /messages, we include a state block for the members present in that block of events (as of the beginning of the block of events).
 * In theory we can avoid sending membership events to the client which we know are redundant - i.e. ones where the membership hasn't changed for a given user since we last sent a membership event to the client in that /messages sequence.  Just like /sync, this is optional, and implementations may choose not to track precisely which memberships a given user has seen.  As noted at https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/b54b03f9e1abc1964fe5f00115a165a2b8e10df5/synapse/handlers/pagination.py#L262, this optimisation hasn't been implemented in Synapse yet (and i imagine @turt2live will want to note this on this PR's description comment).  As a result, /messages in LL mode uses slightly more bandwidth currently on Synapse because it includes all members for the events in the response in the state block of that response, even if it's redundant.
 * The reason we could get away without the state block prior to LL was because we already knew all the members in the room at the point we started back-paginating.

Now, if `include_redundant_members` is true, the state block must include the membership events for all the events present in that block whatever.  In other words, Synapse's current behaviour for /messages is the same as if `include_redundant_members` is true.

Hope that clears it up?

Author: > i'm kinda regretting agreeing to let include_redundant_members be a thing. as far as I know, nobody's actually used it, and it just complicates the spec.

I haven't really used it because up until writing this PR I didn't really understand how lazy-loading actually affects things. I do plan on using it though, as it's useful for bots which need to populate pills/mentions with profile metadata (and other things they might do).

>and i imagine @turt2live will want to note this on this PR's description comment

This is mentioned under "Notable lacks of implementation" already.

----

That clears it up for me though, thank you!

which return events. These filters alter the data returned from those APIs.
Not all APIs accept filters.

Lazy-loading room members
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Membership events often take significant resources for clients to track. In an
effort to reduce the number of resources used, clients can enable "lazy-loading"
for room members. By doing this, servers will only ever send membership events
which are relevant to the client.

In terms of filters, this means enabling ``lazy_load_members`` on a ``RoomEventFilter``
(or a ``StateFilter`` in the case of ``/sync`` only). When enabled, lazy-loading
aware endpoints (see below) will only include membership events for the ``sender``
of events being included in the response. For example, if a client makes a ``/sync``
request with lazy-loading enabled, the server will only return membership events
for the ``sender`` of events in the timeline, not all members of a room.

Repeated calls to lazy-loading aware endpoints will result in redundant membership
events being excluded by default. Clients often track which membership events they
already have, therefore making the extra information not as useful to the client.

> Clients can always request redundant members by setting ``include_redundant_members``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clients can always request redundant membership events by setting ``include_redundant_members``
```

to true in the filter.

Servers should be cautious about which events they consider redundant. Membership
events can change over time, and should be included as relevant to maintain the
historical record. Likewise, clients should be cautious about treating an older event
as the current membership event for a user.

.. Note::
   Repeated calls using the same filter to *any* lazy-loading aware endpoint may

>    result in redundant members being excluded from future calls. For example, a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   result in redundant membership events being excluded from future calls. For example, a
```

   request to ``/sync`` followed by a request to ``/messages`` may result in a

>    future call to ``/sync`` excluding members included by the ``/messages`` call.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   future call to ``/sync`` excluding membership events returned by the ``/messages`` call.
```
